[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We sort of live all our
life preparing to be happy.
We never actually are happy
when we experience things.
My name is Nateya, and
I'm from New Guinea.
It's a very small little town
in the modern country of Nepal,
actually well known as the
birthplace of Lord Buddha.
And I was born in that village.
It gives me great
fortune to be born there.
And I have devoted a
major part of my life
in the study and practice
of Buddhist teachings.
When I started studying,
I went to college.
I was actually
enrolled in science,
so I was doing physics and bio.
Fortunately, I quit.
[LAUGHTER]
Otherwise, I don't know
where I would end up.
Maybe some major in
college or something,
because my senior
brother is an engineer.
And that's what my
family wanted me to be.
Personally, I wanted
to be a doctor.
I thought maybe that way, I
can serve this society better.
What was I searching for?
What was I looking for?
What I really wanted to
do becomes very clear.
Just like Buddha, I
want to get enlightened.
I have such a burning
desire, you know?
At that time, I was
trying to understand
what is this Western world.
Because by that
time, I had started
hearing about it, the Western
world, and the developed
countries, and all
of these ideas.
I really wanted to
understand how it's going on.
I realized that all
the genius people born
in Western hemisphere,
they've been somehow
naturally very interested
in searching that is outer.
Like electricity
was discovered here.
So many other things,
these technologies,
the wonderful roads, the
buildings, and everything.
How to design, how to
improve the life in outer.
And when I really
started searching deeply,
I realized all the genius people
that were born in our culture,
in our Western world,
somehow annoyingly devoted
all their life, all
their time, trying
to find out something that
is inner, investigating mind.
Mind is a very
mysterious subject.
It has no shape, no
form, and no address.
We never know where it lives.
So we say that
closest link to reach
to the mind is with
the body, our own body.
And we can say, for example,
when we are very angry,
and let's say our mind is
very angry at something,
we start showing
result in our body.
Our heartbeats raise up.
Our breathing becomes very fast.
We start feeling hardened
when bad things happen.
So the ritual in a way
is to train the body.
When we calm down our
body, make it relaxed,
it becomes able to identify
the mind and work with it.
There are certain facts, certain
truths about the universe,
that affect every single thing.
When we start observing, a
very universal phenomenon
starts arising.
It starts becoming very
apparent that things change,
things are evolving constantly.
When we begin the observing
around, very absolutely
doing nothing from our
side and just observing,
reality starts appearing.
We start seeing that
our minds are changing,
our thoughts are
changing, our emotions
are changing all the time.
Also outside, the
seasons are changing.
Everything is moving.
This is a universal
principle, a universal law
that affects and governs
every single entity in it.
And it also affects
our own life.
From our thoughts, to our
environment, to our community.
It says when we meditate,
we become aware and develop
a quality to be able to perceive
that everything is changing.
Once that starts
becoming apparent,
we start connecting ourselves
to this bigger phenomenon that's
all around us.
This is the enlightenment.
This is this state leading
towards the enlightenment.
That gives us a profound peace.
That's the beginning of peace.
My initial question was
something like a seed.
And over the years, it evolved.
There were roots,
there were branches,
and several other things
that started happening.
And I started searching for
something else and something
else.
So it has been a
continuously evolving search.